Initialize a "preflight guide" (#879)
IntersectMBO/ouroboros-consensus: docs/website/contents/for-developers/PreflightGuide.md

# Preflight guide

This document lists possible steps in getting familiar with the core of the Cardano universe with a focus on topics that are important for the daily life of a Consensus developer.

Every step has a clear **goal** as well as optional ideas for other activities.

This document contains various footnotes with additional information that can be safely skipped on a first pass.

## Setting up a local node

The [cardano-node][] (usually just called "node") is the most important consumer[^other-consensus-consumers] of the Consensus and Storage layer maintained by the Consensus team.
It is *the* way to get a full copy of "the" blockchain for any given network[^cardano-node-purpose], in particular and most importantly, for **mainnet**. This process is called "syncing".

Having a local copy of the node is not absolutely essential for your daily work, but it can be useful in several cases:

 - Assessing a change for correctness and performance problems by using the entire multi-year history of Cardano as a test case.
 - Quickly gathering empirical statistics of quantities of interest, like minimum/average/maximum size/validation time/frequency of blocks.

>  - Direct access to any on-chain data, like the current stake distribution or UTxO size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Directly accessing any on-chain data, like the current stake distribution or UTxO size.
```

... to keep the tenses consistent.

### Disclaimer

 - The node is currently relatively resource-intensive[^resource-relative], see the minimum system requirements [node release page][].
    - It uses a lot of memory, and the memory requirements are growing as the chain evolves[^utxo-hd].
    - It inherently requires a lot of disk space (as of January 2024, 150GB).
    - During syncing, it is quite CPU-intensive (albeit mostly only on a single core).
      Once syncing is done, it is very light on CPU usage.
 - You do not need to run the node at all times.
   The stored blockchain can also be consumed by other developer tools that are independent of the node.
 - Syncing can take multiple days (full sync in December 2023 on a decently powerful server: 2 days).
   Unless your network connection is very slow compared to your CPU, the bottleneck is likely your CPU.
 - It is safe to cleanly interrupt syncing, eg via <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>C</kbd>.
   The node is able to gracefully resume on restart.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If you're in a rush and do not mind a little extra clutter, it's possible to sync to mainnet in about two hours by using the [Mithril client](https://mithril.network/doc/). See [here](https://mithril.network/doc/manual/getting-started/bootstrap-cardano-node/) for instructions.

```

Author: Thanks, I incorporated this in a section called "Syncing faster" :+1:

    - The logging system supports human-readable or JSON output (look for `ScText`/`ScJson`).
      `ScJson` sometimes contains more information, and it can be handy for automatic processing via eg `jq`.
    - Note that Genesis files are still mutable as long as their corresponding era is still in development (like Conway as of early 2024), so your configuration file might need changes once you update your node.
 - `--topology`: This file defines how/when the node will connect to other nodes.
   Get the default [here][cardano mainnet topo].

   While syncing, it makes sense to set the valency, ie the number of nodes sampled from the given DNS name to connect to, to `1` for better performance.[^genesis-syncing]

Make sure to store the log output somewhere.

### Syncing to mainnet

Now you are ready to start syncing to mainnet!

During this long process, you can stare at the log output, and eg look for lines containing `Chain extended` or `AddedToCurrentChain`, which (at least) mention the slot number of the most recently added block.
Bonus points for a plot of your sync progress over time!

> ## TODO

Reviewer: What about hinting at other possible things the readers of this document might do and creating an epic with the items below so that we don't have a TODO lingering on?

Author: Opened https://github.com/IntersectMBO/ouroboros-consensus/issues/887 :+1:

   See [here][Mithril instructions] for instructions.
 - Maybe someone you know has a very recent local copy of the mainnet ChainDB.
   If you are sure you *really* trust them, ask them to send you their ChainDB (or at least the missing parts) via eg [Magic Wormhole][].

## Understanding ledger snapshots and using db-analyser

You need a local ChainDB for this step, see the previous step.

[db-analyser][] is a tool maintained by the Consensus team to gather information and investigate problems (especially performance-related) by analyzing a local ChainDB, providing a variety of analysis passes.

### Ledger snapshots

A *ledger snapshot* is the CBOR serialization of the (extended[^extended-ledger-state]) *ledger state*, which represents the summary of all blocks up to a specific point[^glossary], the tip point or point of the last applied block, that is necessary to judge the validity of any block extending the last applied block.
Here, "validity" refers most prominently to the ledger rules ("Does this person actually have enough money to make that payment?") of the [Cardano ledger].

> On disk, the file name of a ledger snapshot usually contains the slot number of its tip point.

Reviewer 3: It might be interesting to mention that if you add a suffix to the snapshot file name, it won't be deleted even if found to be invalid. Particularly useful if you are tinkering with (de)serialization changes to make sure you don't lose your 1M slot snapshot by accident and have to replay it from scratch.

Author: Good idea, added a footnote a bit further down:

> db-analyser only ever reads/writes snapshots with a `_db-analyser` suffix in the file name, eg `4492800_db-analyser`. The node itself will create snapshots without a suffix (eg `4492800`), but can also read snapshots with any suffix. Crucially, the node won't ever *delete* snapshots with a suffix, as opposed to unsuffixed ones, which are periodically garbage-collected, as well as deleted if the node can't decode them.

Also added "What I Wish I Knew When Working In Consensus" as a tagline :smile:

   See [here][Mithril instructions] for instructions.
 - Maybe someone you know has a very recent local copy of the mainnet ChainDB.
   If you are sure you *really* trust them, ask them to send you their ChainDB (or at least the missing parts) via eg [Magic Wormhole][].

## Understanding ledger snapshots and using db-analyser

You need a local ChainDB for this step, see the previous step.

[db-analyser][] is a tool maintained by the Consensus team to gather information and investigate problems (especially performance-related) by analyzing a local ChainDB, providing a variety of analysis passes.

### Ledger snapshots

A *ledger snapshot* is the CBOR serialization of the (extended[^extended-ledger-state]) *ledger state*, which represents the summary of all blocks up to a specific point[^glossary], the tip point or point of the last applied block, that is necessary to judge the validity of any block extending the last applied block.
Here, "validity" refers most prominently to the ledger rules ("Does this person actually have enough money to make that payment?") of the [Cardano ledger].
On disk, the file name of a ledger snapshot usually contains the slot number of its tip point.

> ### Running db-analyser passes

Reviewer 4: I remember that we note somewhere in the docs that you should probably use `db-analyser` with a copy of an immutable DB, because it might mess with the contents a bit

Author: Hmm, I locally always use db-analyser directly with the ImmDB of my local node, didn't have problems so far, but that doesn't mean there are no problems. Did you have a specific db-analyser functionality in mind that might be destructive?

Another point: Unless one uses some copy-on-write filesystem (I am still using boring ext4), using a copy of the ImmDB seems quite wasteful, given its current size of >160GB.

[cardano-node]: https://github.com/IntersectMBO/cardano-node
[cardano-cli]: https://github.com/IntersectMBO/cardano-cli
[cardano-db-sync]: https://github.com/IntersectMBO/cardano-db-sync
[kupo]: https://github.com/cardanosolutions/kupo
[hydra]: https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra
[ogmios]: https://github.com/CardanoSolutions/ogmios
[node release page]: https://github.com/IntersectMBO/cardano-node/releases
[cardano mainnet conf]: https://github.com/IntersectMBO/cardano-node/blob/master/configuration/cardano/mainnet-config.yaml
[cardano mainnet topo]: https://github.com/IntersectMBO/cardano-node/blob/master/configuration/cardano/mainnet-topology.json
[Mithril client]: https://mithril.network/doc
[Mithril instructions]: https://mithril.network/doc/manual/getting-started/bootstrap-cardano-node
[Magic Wormhole]: https://github.com/magic-wormhole/magic-wormhole
[db-analyser]: https://github.com/IntersectMBO/ouroboros-consensus/blob/main/ouroboros-consensus-cardano/README.md#db-analyser
[Cardano ledger]: https://github.com/IntersectMBO/cardano-ledger

> [Glossary]: https://ouroboros-consensus.cardano.intersectmbo.org/docs/for-developers/Glossary

Author: Right, I didn't think of that for some reason. I am too lazy to open a PR for that, let's :pray: that we don't migrate our website to a different place soon :smile:
